Today we've covered Vanilla JS in general
with, I know, different techniques.
But I didn't want to push my way of work,
but to follow me in the flow of
thoughts and how to solve problems so
then you can create your own framework.
We've seen the DOM API.
Not the whole DOM API, it's huge,
but the most important part.
The fetch, that was actually simple.
Some design patterns we've seen, for
example, how you can broadcast your
own custom events and
then how you listen to those events.
Single page applications,
how to do the routing things.
Web components and
the three parts of web components,
custom elements,
the template element, and shadow DOM.
And some ideas on how to use reactive
programming in Vanilla JavaScript.
Again, you have small libraries that will
solve each of these issues differently.
At the end,
they're using Vanilla JavaScript also.
So you can take ideas from those
frameworks, from those libraries,
you can use those libraries if you want.
So let's go back to the main
fears of Vanilla JS, and
let's try to see where we are, okay?
Routing for single page applications.
We've seen that that's not
really a big problem yet.
The one that we have is really
concentrated in our project.
We didn't use regular expressions, but
adding that part is not really so
difficult.
It's too verbose and time consuming.
Yeah, maybe, it's up to you.
And that brain icon I have there, it means
that it has to do with how you think,
how do you want things to be done?
And maybe you can create
your own mini-framework,
mini-library, so
you don't have that part, okay?
So by default Vanilla JS is not forcing
you into doing things in this way.
State management, we've seen that
you can do things with arrays,
global things,
you can have different patterns here.
And again if you wanna use Redux or
any other design pattern for that, fine.
At the end it's just design pattern,
abstractions, layers.
Templating, we've seen basic templating,
how to use a template string.
But for those of you that
are coming from React or Angular,
you're expecting more from the template,
and there are ways to do that.
So we've seen the basics, but using,
for example, literal strings,
you can use tagged literal strings to
make things really, really useful.
I'm not sure if you have heard
about lit-html, for example.
lit-html is, it's a quick framework that
is, let me explain quickly how that works.
The idea is that when you are,
for example,
defining a template string like this one,
let me add this on the app.js.
We don't get rid of that.
So you can do something like this.
I'm not saying this will work
because I'm not doing it fully.
But you can have things like,
okay, have a paragraph.
And I want the paragraph to have a style.
And I want this style to have, here,
something coming from an object.
This is not JavaScript, it's not React,
I'm not actually doing this,
I'm doing this.
And you say, okay, this is not gonna work,
but I can pass this
template string to a tag.
What's a tag?
For example, something like this,
frontendmasters.
And you say, okay, what's that?
It's not a function.
I'm not using parentheses, okay?
So it doesn't look like a function call,
but it's actually a function.
It's called a tag for template strings.
The tag is going to
function with that name.
Again, I'm not explaining this fully,
I'm just giving you an idea
of what you can do.
And this function will receive portions
of this string that you can process.
So you can find with regular expressions,
for example, parts of that string and
do something with that.
So with this technique, lit-html is one,
there are many that are doing that, yeah?
>> In some of our highly dynamic
components we started using
lit-html cuz not only can you do
the kind of like click handlers and
these kinds of things inside the template,
but it also has the intelligent updating.
So if you throw it a very
giant template literal at, for
instance, a table or a row, and
only one part of it changes,
it will intelligently only
update that one part.
And you can use things like repeat,
which is kinda like React where
you can keep things in order so
you're not doing unnecessary DOM-
>> Yeah, sure, so
it's doing some of the things that other
libraries are doing, but it's lightweight.
And it's just focusing on
this part of the problem,
not the whole thing that React is solving.
But if you look at how it looks like,
it looks like this.
It has that html prefix
to the template string.
And that's the one that's doing the magic,
such as reading this and
making an event listener for
the click without a clickHandler, okay?
So that magic that you can do
with tagged little strings is,
I mean if you wanna do
it manually on your own,
you have like an obstruction layer there,
not really so difficult.
But it's a way that you have to improve
your templates if you don't like
how the template work by default, okay?
And, again, this version was not
really to be against libraries,
is to understand how things work.
So you can decide when to use a library or
a framework, and
when to use mini libraries for
specific reasons.
So then we can discuss forever,
if you add lit-html
into your toolbox,
is that Vanilla JS or not?
It doesn't matter actually, okay?
So it doesn't matter.
If it solves your issue, and
it's not adding performance penalty as
you can have with full React
client-side application, it's fine.
Again, if not,
you're reinventing the wheel.
So that's okay,
we don't want you to reinvent the wheel.
But if you find a wheel that
solves your problem, it's fine.
The problem with some frameworks
is that it's not a wheel, right?
It's a whole plane that you're adding,
just for a wheel, okay?
That's the problem of a big framework or
library.
So that was for the fear of templating.
Complexity, I mean,
I know what you feel right now,
was it so complex?
I mean, if you look at the code right now,
is it complex?
I'm not sure if complex is
actually what's going on.
The problem is that when you don't know
the stuff, everything looks complex.
And I know a lot of developers that
were developers when I started that
didn't make the shift or
they stopped working as web developers.
And they feel like React is complex.
Because that has to do with ignorance.
I mean, if you're ignorant of something,
it looks complex.
It has to do with that.
Reusable components, well,
we saw how to create web components.
Yeah, you can decide it's better,
worse, but
we can create reusable
components these days.
Even you can export from Angular,
React, or Vue, web components as well.
And you can use them as web
components in a Vanilla JavaScript.
Fine, that's possible.
How to maintain this also
has to do with your design
patterns, how your way of thinking works.
So it has to do with your work.
Learning curve, well,
you did the workshop, you're still here,
you didn't get away.
So, I mean, I don't think it's bigger
than learning a framework, actually.
Browser compatibility, everything that
we've seen today works everywhere.
Maybe one specific part
that is not in Safari, but
everything that we have already
implemented works everywhere.
The only X that we have there,
so it's not really a big issue.
The only problem is still,
if you have some banks,
corporate governments,
they're still on IEEE 11.
Well, you need to be very careful.
The same will happen with React.
So it's no different than React,
Angular, or View, okay?
So it's not really, really a big deal.
Reinventing the wheel every time,
again, that has to do with yourself,
are you going to create
your own framework?
Are you going to add abstractions
layers to what we have done today?
Because it has to do with that.
I have created, as I mentioned,
more than 100 web apps in Vanilla JS.
And, yeah,
I wasn't reinventing the wheel every time.
I was using my own ideas, again,
my own code, my little framework,
my little utility functions to
avoid reinventing the wheel.
But it's up to you, it's not something
that the platform will give you.
It's up to the usage of best practices and
design patterns.
Scalability is still,
again, something that it depends
on how you're doing things.
By default, if everything is chaos in your
code, yeah, it's going to be a problem.
And that's why I know that some
companies when they decide to,
we're going to use, and I'm hearing
this a lot, we're going to use Angular.
Because we have TypeScript, it is forced.
And it will force developers
to do things in this way,
because if we give them freedom, okay?
Everything is chaos.
Well, it has to do with that,
with following rules, guidelines.
So, yeah?
>> We've never seen any large React or
Angular code bases that are performant,
right?
>> Yeah, that's a performance, yeah.
>> I'm just saying, in general,
yeah, a lot of code bases can,
no matter what tool you use-
>> Exactly,
no matter what tool you use,
it will get the mess at one point, yeah.
Yeah, that's true.
So again, now that you know Vanilla JS,
you can decide to use lightweight
libraries tools one by one,
based on your needs.
That's okay, okay?
You wanna use Redux because you like it,
go ahead.
You don't need React, you can use Redux.
You wanna use lit-html, that's okay.
You wanna use a router.
There are a lot of routers that
will give you more power without
another UI framework.
You need the UI framework
because you feel like you will
have a lot of reactivity and data.
Well, go ahead, use the framework.
The problem is to decide a framework or
a library based on,
that's the only thing I know and
that's why I'm picking it.
That's the problem, okay?
So now it's time for you to define
design patterns you prefer for
everything that we have seen, and create
your own unique library for your needs.
Maybe that's the way.
And decide when to use that and
when not to use that.
>> I'll just say, in general,
leading this company I
find having small modules that
will live for a decade plus.
That I'm not gonna have to NPM update and
then have everything break.
I just find that it is a good use of
development resources, and granted I lead
the company so I can say, hey, we're
building this in a certain way, right?
Not only me coding but our developers,
but I do enjoy the fact that, well,
if there's a new paradigm.
So, for instance,
right now if you have an SPA React app,
now everybody's saying, hey, now you
have to rewrite it next, or whatever.
And then there's a continually, as you've
been in the industry for 20 plus years,
you've seen the churn from
everybody was on AngularJS and
then everybody moved to this, and then
moved to that, and it's a constant cycle.
Which is great, keeps us employed,
we can keep building new things and
new styles which I appreciate.
But yeah, as an owner of a business
that's been in existence for
over a decade, I appreciate that we can
just open up a module and it works.
And if anything, JavaScript has
gotten better over the years,
we can just swap out, a different way
of doing things with a new feature
that does the same thing,
it's just clearer code or whatever.
So yeah, that's my perspective, and I wish
more organizations would look at that
as a potential path-
>> Yeah, talking with many organizations,
what they say right now sometimes
is that it's difficult for
them to hire Vanilla JS developers.
So it's difficult to find
developers that knows or
even wants to work with Vanilla JS.
But mostly it has to do
with they don't know it.
Because all the bootcamps and
all the new staff from education point of
view in the past five years
were basically React.
>> I'd agree there's definitely
a stigma around that.
But from that perspective of hiring and
that kinda thing.
But yeah, [LAUGH].
>> Okay.
>> I'd say it's been a major win for
us in terms of paying off in terms of
performance maintainability, etc., so.
>> Any final question, online or here?
No?
Well, that's all then, thanks.
>> [APPLAUSE]